EUROPEAN STOCK EXCHANGES
There is no doubt that the
Zagreb Stock Exchange developed
in line with the stock exchanges
in Europe and around the world.
Its origins go back to ancient
times or the Hanseatic era.
The first exchange
was founded in Amsterdam.
This had no impact on Croatia.
Our first exchange
emerged in Rijeka in 1781.
It traded in sugar as this was the
only commodity produced in Rijeka.
Rijeka was actually
the main sugar supplier
for the Habsburg Monarchy
and the Ottoman Empire.
There is a beautiful hall in Rijeka
adorned with breathtaking paintings
whose purpose was to make
sugar traders feel better.
Luka Sorkočević
took over this idea
and had a similar hall
built in Rijeka Dubrovačka
where Rijeka had a subsidiary
for the Ottoman Empire.
By the end of the 18th century, all
nation-states had their exchanges.
The oldest one is
the London Exchange,
which dates back to 1560.
The Paris Exchange
was founded in 1563.
At the end of the 18th century,
it became clear that the exchanges
should be modernised.
For this purpose, Napoleon adopted
the Code de Commerce,
a commerce act,
on the basis of which the Paris
Stock Exchange was to be built.
Construction began
in 1809, and ended in 1828.
As social changes took hold in
the mid 19th century, Europe
saw the emergence
of the Vienna Stock Exchange
and that of Budapest in 1868.
It resulted from the need to regulate
the foreign exchange market
and the standardised
commodities trade
as well as to facilitate trade on
the basis of commercial samples.
This, of course, had an
impact on our domestic trade
but around 1900
there was a huge problem
arising from the effort
to organise the foreign exchange
and commodities trade in Zagreb
in the same manner.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE ZAGREB STOCK EXCHANGE
Count Khuen
Hedervary's era showed
that Croatia could no longer
exist as some sort of a colony.
In 1903 a new era was dawning,
largely thanks to the tradesmen
who lived in Zagreb
and had chosen
Zagreb as their business centre.
The Zagreb Trading House
was founded in 1900
and the Tradesmen
Association in 1904
at the Grand Café on
today's Ban Jelačić Square.
In 1907, the Commodities
and Stocks Section
was established within
the Trading House.
Even then it was
called the stock exchange,
but if you look at the documents,
you will find it under the name of
the Commodities
and Stocks Section.
The scope of the stock exchange
and the Section was the same.
The Section was very important
as it enabled an accelerated
commodities trade.
Gjuro Deželić, who
retired in 1906, said
that the institution was of key
importance for the Croatian people
and that he did not
understand why state officials
and city representatives
did not attend its opening.
Regardless of that,
the Section began operations.
In 1913, it moved to today's
European House in Jurišić Street,
where it remained until 1927.
However, the Stock Exchange
operated with interruptions.
It was closed in 1914 by World War I,
as all monopolised goods,
including grain, meat, etc., were
traded with through state sections
for the purpose of war commerce
and whatever else a particular
country deemed necessary.
When the strict war commerce
began to lose its grip in 1917
after Emperor Franz Josef's
death, the Tradesmen Association
renewed the Section
on 4 January 1918,
but now under a new name -
the Stock Exchange.
The Stock Exchange remained
in operation even at the end of 1918,
during the State of Slovenes,
Croats and Serbs
that lasted only 45 days.
This can be attributed to Dr Ðuro
Šurmin, a university professor
and the National Council's
Trade and Industry Commissioner.
On 4 December 1918 he organised
a meeting to choose members
for the Stock Exchange Council
and to adopt the rulebook
as he believed that the new state,
founded on 1 December,
would realise the importance of
Zagreb and its stock exchange.
He saw its potential to help the
state overcome the post-war crisis
and start actively participating in
Europe's commercial operations.
In 1918, the Stock Exchange
was restored
with both its foreign exchange and
commodities departments operating
and the Exchange did indeed
become a powerful centre
which helped the
newly founded state,
the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes, to overcome the crisis.
Even though the Stock Exchange
operated according to the rules,
and even though Šurmin thought
there could be two state centres,
one political - Belgrade,
and one commercial - Zagreb,
this did not happen
as Belgrade put all its efforts
into moving commerce there.
By 1923 this slowed
down its activities
even though a provision validated
the Zagreb Stock Exchange,
since then, the year 1919
is taken as its founding year.
We know, however,
that it was founded in 1907
regardless of all its ups and downs.
It is interesting to analyse
how Belgrade slowly took
over the Zagreb Stock Exchange.
When the kruna was substituted
by the dinar, at a ratio of 4 to 1,
Zagreb's business community
was not greatly affected
as these were
highly skilled traders
who fitted well into
Europe's monetary system.
But when Milan Stojadinović
became the Minister of Finance,
the Zagreb Stock Exchange
was no longer allowed
foreign exchange trade.
Direct commodities trade,
both mass and standardised,
was blocked.
Thus the commercial centre
began moving to Belgrade.
However, in 1921,
when the Zagreb Stock Exchange
was the only stock exchange here
that traded with Europe, a
binding decision was made
to build a special palace
for the Zagreb Stock Exchange.
This had actually already
been stipulated at the meeting
on 4 December 1918 when
Šurmin made such a proposal.
Designs were made in 1921,
and thanks to the efforts of
Croatian and Slavonian traders,
this grand edifice, the Zagreb Stock
Exchange Palace, was built in 1927.
It was built in marble
and had elements of the state-of
-the-art architecture of that period.
However, all this was
done with an aim.
The plan was to build a similar
palace across the street
but it was only built ten years later.
It was supposed to
be an entrance to Zagreb's City,
since the modern Zagreb
was to be built to the south-east,
as indeed happened.
The palace enabled Zagreb's
and Croatia's businessmen
to remain a significant
factor in the Croatian economy.
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
AND THE DISCONTINUATION
OF THE STOCK EXCHANGE
The Great Depression was
not felt in the country in 1929,
but there was a political crisis then.
The economic crisis started
only in the autumn of 1931,
with the collapse of the
First Croatian Savings Bank.
Commissioners were appointed to
head all the monetary institutions,
including the
Zagreb Stock Exchange.
The commissioners included
Radomir Zec and Dušan Plavšić.
They worked as Belgrade dictated.
The Stock Exchange kept operating
but its activities were reduced.
It was not allowed
to trade in foreign exchange,
but it helped the country
get out of the crisis
as the employees
spoke German well,
and thus helped Yugoslavia enter
trading agreements with Germany.
This happened in 1934
when the Third Reich started
purchasing all the market surpluses
produced in Yugoslavia.
It was crucial to do business
through the Zagreb Stock Exchange
as it had a central position with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its mineral resources, grain
and cattle. All this prevented
the crisis from having
a major impact on Zagreb.
The country managed to
pull through in 1932,
with the help of construction work
and increased export,
which could not have developed
without the participation of Zagreb.
This continued in the Autonomous
Banovina of Croatia as well.
Stock Exchange presidents changed,
but all of them
were noted businessmen.
Many of whom
became ministers in Belgrade,
and cooperated well with Serbs
but also contributed to the
development of Croatian economy,
which was by no means crushed
in the period between the wars.
It was crushed, however,
by World War II
and the emergence
of war commerce.
All valuable
goods went to the Third Reich,
which underpriced
everything it bought
and overpriced everything it sold,
for instance technical goods,
so there was always a huge trade
gap between Croatia and Germany.
Croatia was constantly in debt.
In 1945, the activities
of all banks came to a halt
and the Stock Exchange
was badly affected by this.
The whole ground-floor was leased out
since the Stock Exchange
no longer had many employees,
as Belgrade had played it. During
the Independent State of Croatia,
the Stock Exchange worked with
the Nazis. This ended in 1945,
when the Exchange was pronounced
a speculative institution
and its archives were
destroyed so we cannot
reconstruct its business
on the basis of exact numbers.
We know that balance sheets are
rarely made known to the public,
especially in the case
of the stock exchange.
There were many
secret transactions
and we have only
partial information.
I do know, however, that in 1943,
trade with the Third Reich
amounted to 6 billion kuna,
and trade with Rome to 711 million.
So a huge amount of money was
going through the Stock Exchange
to different companies. In 1945
the premises were reallocated
and that was the
end of the Stock Exchange.
The library of the Croatian Chamber
of Trades and Craft still exists,
but has been kept
in the underground vaults
of the National Library.
To open them would be helpful
and would shed light on the history
of Croatian economic institutions.
I have no idea why it is still closed
and has been so since 1946.
However, that archive
concerns only the Chamber
and not the Stock Exchange
whose archives were
almost completely destroyed.